appendix 5 biography Elena Guerrero de
Paz Elena gatherer de Paz was born of
Spanish parents in Puebla Mexico on
December 11th 1917 all information in
this section called from biography data
form prepared by Charles Thomas
Mescalero attended the National
Autonomous University of Mexico and
later did graduate work at Berkeley in
California and at the University of
Paris in 1963 Elena had long been
married to Octavio Paz a career diplomat
who is also one of Mexico's finest poets
and leading intellectuals when Octavio
was named Mexican ambassador to India
the couple separated by mutual consent
Elena's daughter also named Elena has
always resided with her mother since
Elena spent 17 years of her early life
in Europe she had a rather unknown
objectivity about her native land and
had a reputation for being one of its
more articulate detractors at the same
time Elena was considered emotionally
committed to many aspects of Mexican
life and made an important contribution
to its artistic development in the 1960s
Elena became a significant writer hogar
solido el rey Mago la Senora ensue
balcon Ventura ayan des ondes por las
rama's parada empresa and el viaje are
plays that have had appreciative
audiences in europe where they were
translated into german as well as in
mexico miss Guerrero's short stories are
collected in a volume called
la semana de colores the literacy
supplement of the London Times has
called her novel los recuerdos de Laura
near a splendid success critics have
said of her for Elena Guerrero there is
no frontier between reality and fantasy
in any case the latter is a second
reality perhaps more intense to which
one may penetrate without passport or
forewarning thanks to the effectiveness
of a literature fired with passion
flavor and
life many people who knew Elena have
asserted that the frontier between
reality and fantasy is also difficult
for her to distinguish in real life
biography data form on Elena Guerra de
Paz prepared by Charles Thomas miss
Guerrero for many years was an active
worker in the Confederation Nationale
Campesina
cnc the agrarian arm of the partido
reformist ax PRI because miss guerrero
was a tireless propagandist and agitator
on behalf of the poorer mexican peasants
she was on close personal terms with and
enjoyed the respect of peasant leaders
from all over the country
Elena was considered a witty urbane and
opinionated woman with an unflagging
sense of humor her forthright opinions
and sharp wit tended on occasion to
ruffle feathers in Mexico but her
important social literacy and political
connections rendered her fairly immune
from serious counter-attack until 1968
then miss Guerrero was forced to flee
the country with her daughter Elaine
eita and her sister daiba Guerrero de
Galvan in the midst of the student
strikes the House Select Committee on
assassinations has been unable to
determine the exact reason miss Guerrero
had for fleeing Mexico before her
disappearance from Mexico
Elena was well disposed toward the
United States and had been friendly with
embassy officers her broad range of
significant personal friends the views
of many important to the American
Embassy made her a useful embassy target
a useful embassy target is a person
deemed important enough because of
acquaintances to merit frequent contact
either witting or unwitting with
american embassy officials